Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricard Loops. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Steven Grossberg. He is Wang, professor
of Cognitive and neuro Systems, Professor Emeritus of Mathematics
and Statistics, psychological and brain sciences and biomedical engineering
at Boston University. And today we're focusing on one
of his books, the latest one. And I guess
that Steve would agree with me when I say
that it's probably his magnum opus conscious mind, resonant
brain. How each brain makes a mind. So, Steve,
welcome to the show. It's an honor to everyone.
Well, it's a delight to be here and it's
one of the wonders of modern zoom that you're
in Portugal and I'm in Newton Massachusetts. So there
we go.
Yeah. There we go. It's modern technology, right?
Yeah. Which got really amplified greatly when COVID happened.
That's when zoom really took off.
Yeah, that, that's totally right. So to get into
the topics here, then I, in the first few
sections of your book, you get into how we
tackle basically the brain, how we understand the brain,
the mind and the relationship between them and how
you can do it through several different perspectives, mostly
you focus on physics and psychology. So to introduce
the topic, could you tell us perhaps and also
to add some historical background here for the audience?
Could you tell us how uh physics and psychology
approach approach this issue? And historically, when and how
did they split in their approaches?
Yeah. Well, at the um in the late 18
hundreds, uh three very great physicists Helmholtz, I'm sorry,
Hermann, Von Helmholtz in Germany, Clerk Maxwell in England
and Ernst Mach in Austria made seminal contributions to
psychology and neuroscience. Uh At that time, if you
were interested in the structure of physical space and
time, you would just as likely try to study
psychological space and time. But um so they were
uh interested in understanding how the observed world which
is physics developed side by side their analysis of
the observer, which is us. But by the time
we got to the young Albert Einstein, oh, he
didn't do psychology anymore. He just did physics. And
I wanna quote just a little thing that he
wrote to his friend, Queen Elizabeth of Belgium in
1933 which was much later. But this was his
stance throughout life that quote, most of us prefer
to look outside rather than inside ourselves. For in
the latter case we see but a dark hole
which means nothing at all. So in the late
18 hundreds of the greatest physicists did psychology and
physics and some neuroscience. And then Einstein who's at
least is great and did only physics. And the
question is why. And one main reason is due
to the properties of the experimental data that Helmholtz
Maxwell and Mach uh discovered. And that data has
characteristics that I like saying a nonlinear non stationary
and non local. Whereas traditional physics use models that
are linear stationary and local. So what do those
words mean? Well, nonlinear means uh in the simplest
form, the whole isn't the sum of its parts.
You know, you chop us up into parts and
life is no longer supported. But nonlinearity more technically
means that you multiply variables. You don't just add
them linear means you just add stuff non stationary
means we're always evolving from being babies. We develop
quickly and then we go on through lifelong learning
and non local in the sense that I'm using
it means that there are long range interactions between
many, many neurons in our brains. And that is
because these interactions enable our brains to understand the
context and the objects in which we experience the
world is not just pixel by pixel in a
painting that our brains look at the whole pattern
which requires interactions. Uh And uh the physicists just
didn't have the concepts or the math to do
it. And in fact, Helmholz, who started out deeply
interested in psychology and physiology ended his life only
doing physics. So maybe that's enough to get started.
And of course, when I asked you here about
how people from physics and psychology, for example, think
about or understand the brain, the mind and the
relationship. I was also at least to some extent
alluding to the mind body problem. So, could you
tell us what exactly is the mind body problem
and why has it been so difficult to tackle?
Ok. Well, when we think of our brain, which
is a central feature in our body and the
one that's relevant to our discussion today, we may
think of the little gray cells of Hercule Poirot.
I don't know if you like mysteries, but I
always loved thinking about the little gray cells, but
we think of our mind, we may think about
a beautiful sunset, a feeling of being in love,
uh you know, deep thoughts or poetry. And there's
a huge gap between those two. And the question
is, how do you bridge the gap? And that's
what my magnum opus uh tries to do as
reflected by its title Conscious Mind Resonant Brain. How
each brain makes a mind? How do we bridge
the gap? And my book therefore, tries to have
a comprehensive and unified description of the main processes
whereby our brains make our minds. And that can
be done because there are vast databases that were
accumulated in psychology and neuroscience uh since the time
of Helm Helmholtz Maxwell and Max. So the problem
wasn't um what am I supposed to explain the
problem was how can I find any explanation of
hundreds of experiments and which experiments cohere together? So
in order to even even begin this, you have
to have an intuition in which data uh are
probing the same underlying processes. And what are those
processes? So? Well, we start with perception and at
least two main ones, visual and auditory. I won't
even talk about tactile and that goes on to
cognition and emotion and action. And we can't just
be satisfied with discussing how that goes on in
uh healthy or typical individuals. It's important to also
understand well, what happens when they break down which
they do and can lead to many clinical disorders.
And in the course of my work, I noticed
that if there's certain imbalances or breakdowns in the
neural network processes that I used to model lots
of uh data about typical individuals in a principled
and unifying way. Then al popped uh symptoms of
diseases as varied as Alzheimer's disease, autism, medial temporal
amnesia, schizophrenia, A DH D PTSD, auditory and visual
neglect and agnosia. Even what goes wrong with slow
wave sleep things which I never dreamed of. And
so one of the main things to think about
is, you know, how are you forced into thinking
about things you never dreamed you would know anything
about. And more than that um our brains operate
in cycles as a perception, cognition, emotion action cycle
where we're continually interacting with and adapting to a
rapidly changing environment. So with this background, let's come
down back to the mind body problem. Why are
they so intimately linked? And one theme in my
book and, and think about mind body problem is
brain evolution needs to achieve behavioral success. So the
uh the meat, the little gray cells, uh the
body part of it is intimately linked through Darwinian
selection to uh the mind part of it. Uh
They, they can't be separated. Um So the book
explains how multiple brain circuits and multiple brain regions
interact to generate the behaviors that control our day
to day uh activities and mind is what you
can most efficiently call an emergent property, an interactive
property of these brain mechanisms. And even Von Neumann
knew that that the intelligence isn't just in the
local interaction, it's how many of them interact. So
why my book is unusual is that most books
are about mind or brain, but not about each
brain makes a mind. And in this regard, I
was lucky because I started my life's work when
I was 17 years old, I was a freshman
taking introductory psychology. And there was a lot of
quantitative data about how we learn a classical data,
Hovland Hall. Many other Great American psychologists were into
learning. And so my brain exploded and I was
driven into what became neural networks uh including the
main laws of short term memory, medium term memory,
long term memory that people use today to explain
how brains make minds. So because I started in
psychology and was forced into brain, I was able
to make the link and then build and build
and build with many gifted collaborators for 67 years.
So it was a lucky start. But why my
brain exploded, I can't explain. And um so um
and these are not traditional concepts from computer science,
engineering or traditional symbolic A I, although now a
lot of people call me the father of A
I. Because over the years when symbolic A I
failed, the people in IA I wanted to take
over neural networks to be A I. Marvin Minsky
was one of them. And um anyway, so I'm
called the father of A I because I introduced
the modern paradigm in 1957. Um And along the
way, you know, with all the discoveries that just
poured out uh over these years, uh it's not
just classical stuff because I had to introduce new
computational paradigms to link brain to mind. And I
call two of them complementary computing and laminar computing
and complementary computing explains the nature of brain specialization.
You know, we don't have independent modules like you
don't first compute uh edges and then shading and
then texture and then depth rather. When we look
at an object, all of these properties can be
overlaid, we're looking at a texture depth, full object
with contours boundaries. And so there's a lot of
multiplexing of um properties. And so um complementary computing
was a discovery I gradually made. I didn't wake
up one day and say, oh let's let's assume
the brain as complementary computing. Now I over decades,
I we try to explain more and more data
and in every one of them, there were complementary
pairs of processes and a kind of Yin Yang
relationship computationally complementary until I realized it was a
global design principle for the brain. Like I think
we might come to it in a while that
visual boundaries and surfaces obey computationally complementary laws. The
ventral watt stream that um does perception and recognition
in our brain and the dorsal we stream that
the facial representation and action obey computational complementary laws.
And one of them the what and where is
on a huge scale of atomical organization and the
boundaries and surfaces are much smaller. So you have
a multilevel um uh representation of complimentary complementarity in
all brain processes. And I mentioned lam in a
computer and laminar computing explains how all uh higher
forms of biological intelligence are um explained by variations
of a single canonical Lain a circuit. I mean
some listeners may know that if you look at
uh the Neocortex that supports vision, speech language cognition,
there are six characteristic layers and characteristic sub lamina
with characteristic feedback interactions and horizontal interactions. So bottom
up, top down horizontal in all of these circuits.
And one of the marvels of evolution is that
specializations of the same canonical circuit can do vision,
speech language and cognition. And that's very important when
you think, how do we develop a sense of
self cause our whole cortex shares a design and
all the parts can seamlessly fit together into an
emergent uh architecture that can be resonating uh as
needed to do, you know everything that we do
in our conscious experience. So I've always felt it
was remarkable that some such seemingly different behavioral competences
emerge out of variations of this ship canonical circuit.
And no less remarkable is that circuit supports different
kinds of conscious awareness. And because all those circuits
obey a similar kind of input output scheme, so
they can all be interacted, feed forward feedback, et
cetera that supports consciousness. Um But maybe that's all
I should say about that you have a lot
of questions you want me to answer.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot there to
unpack and it relates to also to some of
the questions that I have
also say for listeners, I think, you know, think
of this interview as listening to his story, everything
in the story can be thought about and studied
on multiple levels. But first get the gist of
the story and, and maybe as we go along,
uh you'll ask me to flesh out things more
but, but your questions really asked me to flesh
things out more. So I, I think we should
follow the questions and then see what made the
needs to be added. Of
course. And so uh you've mentioned words like and
computation there. And I would like to perhaps clarify
that a little bit more. So, are our brains
like computers? I mean, when people talk about com
brains as computers, when they use that metaphor, is
it accurate or not?
Well emphatically not. Um If I start, I just
noted we need new computational paradigms. Uh LIKE complementary
computing, laminate computing. Uh Moreover, traditional computers aren't conscious.
Um So my work provides or off as a
scientific solution, the mind body problem by showing how
where in our brains and even why from a
deep computational perspective, humans can consciously see here, feel
and know things about the world. And we don't
just get conscious to serenely contemplate the beauty of
the world rather we use our conscious states for
reasons I hope will clarify as we go along
because they are competent to uh um control uh
effective planning and action to realize valued goals. And
so consciousness mediates between mind and the world of
action. Um And so to do this, our brains
are self organizing, meaning we can learn by ourselves
autonomously throughout life. Their analog, which means that the
neurons can have values going from minimum to max
and everything in between, not namely shades of gray,
much as you might see an achromatic image in
shades of gray and everything operates in parallel because
everything about our intelligence is organized in terms of
spatially distributed patterns of activation. So self-organizing analog parallel,
but present day computers are not self-organizing and they're
digital and serial. So the architectures are fundamentally different.
Um My own belief is that as uh computers
evolve and they are, you know, they get even
more powerful, like, you know, my iphone is a
supercomputer. Um We have systems that on the one
hand, uh maybe dedicated VL SI chips that embody
more and more of the kind of intelligence that
humans embody are complemented by a lot of things
humans don't do well, which digital computers do like
adding a million numbers in a fraction of a
second. And that will be a very powerful tool
when when and if it happens.
And uh you've already mentioned their uh conscious awareness.
How do we experience conscious moments of seeing, hearing,
feeling, knowing and why do things like perception and
awareness uh matter here?
Well, I wanna emphasize that although I've led the
development of what I think is arguably the most
advanced neural theory of consciousness in the sense that
it provides principal and unifying explanations of the most
psychological and or biological data about conscious experiences. I
never tried to directly understand consciousness. Uh You don't
wake up in the morning and say, hey, you
know, let's understand consciousness today. Uh But instead all
the deepest insights about how our brains work a
concern. One of the things I just mentioned how
they self organize uh through childhood development. And do
you have any kids?
Uh No, not yet. At
least. Well, we have one daughter. Well, anyone who
has observed little kids learn language that's fast self
organization and lifelong learning. We continue learning throughout life.
Remarkably. Uh My models of learning led me forced
me kicking and screaming into insights about consciousness. And
uh so my work on learning led to the
most advanced, currently, the most advanced cognitive and neural
the about how brains learn to pay attention, recognize
and predict objects and events in a changing world
emphatically. One that's filled with unexpected events because that's
what we got to do to deal with evolutionary
challenges. And this is the theory I call adaptive
resonance theory for a reason. I'll make clear in
a moment and all of the foundational hypotheses have
uh from which I could derive art have been
supported by subsequent psychological and neurobiological data. And art
has also provided principled and unifying explanations of many
additional experiments. But for me, the bottom line is
really that I was able to derive art. I
say art A RT instead of adaptive Resonance theory
in 1980 in an off cited article in the
journal Psychological Ro review from a thought experiment. And
this thought experiment is about how any learning system
can autonomously learn to correct predictive errors. So this
is all about autonomous learning and the hypotheses of
the thought experiment are just a few facts that
are familiar to us all. And they're familiar because
they represent ubiquitous environmental pressures on the evolution of
our brain. So they're not something. Oh, well, why
should I believe that? You believe it because you've
been living with it your whole life. And moreover,
during the thought experiment, I never used the word
mind or brain. Mhm. So, the thought experiment and
the principles and mechanisms that come out of the
wash are thus the universal solution to the learning
problem. Wherever those hypotheses are used to derive their
logical consequences, you'll get a system like art and
the learning problem, which I didn't say one crucial
fact about lifelong learning implies that when I learn
something, I won't just forget it right away, which
is called catastrophic forgetting. For example, Ricardo, I never
uh saw your face before and now I'll remember
it for the rest of my life. So I
learn it in a second. I'll remember it for
years. So I call this the stability plasticity dilemma.
How any system can learn without catastrophe, forgetting plasticity
of because we experience incredibly fast learning often and
then stability. The fact that our memory of that
fast learning can persist for a very long time.
And let me just say, for those of you
who know some popular current A I like deep
learning or it experiences catastrophic forgetting big time in
multiple ways. Uh If we maybe we will talk
about a little later. So I think therefore, it's
remarkable. But that these results about learning without catastrophic
forgetting is what led me to rigorous neural models
of how we consciously see, hear and feel and
know things about the world. So I derive the
models I was explaining with simulation, parametric quantitative computer
simulations with my many students and postdoc all this
quantitative data about seeing, hearing, feeling and knowing. And
then I realized all those parametric properties or properties
of conscious experiences. So consciousness sort of came in
through the back door. Uh And the thing that
all of these experiences had in common are resonances
which occur when there's excitatory feedback bottom up, top
down excitatory feedback between pairs or greater numbers of
brain regions when they match their signals well enough
to cause the active cells to synchronize boom, boom,
boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, boom. Um And that's
one reason why we have brain rhythms, but different
brain rhythms support different processes and sustain. They're firing
long enough to trigger not only learning but consciousness.
In other words, the resonances and the requirement for
matching or what dynamically buffer a learning process against
catastrophic forgetting. And the remarkable thing is that the
contents of these resonances match properties of the conscious
experiences that they're learning to represent. That's why I
call my theory adaptive resonance theory because of how
resonances trigger learning that doesn't experience catastrophic forgetting. So
the proposed solution on mind body problem occurs due
to a computational analysis of how humans and other
animals autonomously learn in a changing world without catastrophic
forgetting. And because the hypotheses and the thought experiments
that lead to cognitive models like adaptive resonance theory,
as well as cognitive emotional models, like what I
call my cog and model, the cognitive emotional motor
model never mentioned the word mind and brain. Um
My work and my book show how these models
provide a blueprint for designing autonomous adaptive intelligent applications
to engineering technology and A I. So if you
want autonomous adaptive intelligence, we already have the foundations
of a blueprint for it for the future. Um
In particular, my books spend a lot of time
uh explaining how our brains consciously see the world.
And that's not surprising because more than half of
various mammalian brains are devoted to vision from excuse
me, early sensory processing up to visually based cognitive
planning and navigation. Um In other words, we need
perception and consciousness to be able to act upon
the world by looking, reaching and navigating uh in
order to survive environmental challenges. So this link between
consciousness and action I think is very interesting mediated
by learning that solves the stability plasticity dilemma. Sorry
about this. I have had asthma for over 70
years.
Uh So uh another thing that I would like
to ask you about and it's something that you
also tackle in the book is Visual Illusion. So
how do they work and what can we learn
about? I guess not only the visual system but
information processing by understanding how visual illusions work.
Yeah, I wish we were able to figure out
how to show my powerpoint slides. I'll try to
use the words uh about what the pictures would
have shown more clearly. So first let me sketch
why we experience visual illusions, which will also start
to explain how they work. Um So let's start
with the retina, the photosensitive retina, that's where light
is registered before light signals all over the retina
are bundled through axons as the pathways uh into
the optic nerve to set pattern light from the
whole retina up to the brain because of the
need to form the optic nerve to carry the
light signals to the brain. The retina has no
photo detectors on the part of the retina where
the optic nerve forms, that part of the retina
is blind. And um you might say, well, big
deal, I don't see it, it hasn't caused any
trouble. But if you look down on the retina
and I had a pretty picture to show you
that. And if you get my book, um it
has all these pictures, it has over 600 color
pictures. So everything I say is illustrated, another part
of the retina not far from the blind spot
is called the fovea Fove A. That's where all
of our high acuity vision occurs. And it's because
we need the phia to really see things clearly
that we move our eyes several times every second
with psychotic eye movements to point them to the
things we really wanna see clearly. Things in the
periphery get fuzzier and fuzzier and the blind spot
is as big as the phobia. And now you
might say, but then why don't I see it?
And um, before getting into, why think about it,
we couldn't look at or reach for an object
that happened to re registered where the blind spot
is. If we didn't somehow do something to make
that problem go away and that could lead to
disaster, you know, a leopard is leaping at you
in the place where the blind spot would have
seen it tough. So why aren't we aware of
the missing visual signals due to the blind spot
in particular, how do you complete the retina representation
so that we can look at and reach for
things which otherwise might have been uh invisible. And
one thing you have to deal with right away
is our eyes are rapidly jiggling in the orbit.
They're sort of micro the cards and they're happening
so fast and they're so small, you don't notice
it, but it's functionally very important because there may
be a stationary object in the world and you
are stationary with respect to it. But your retina
is jiggling back and forth around every edge of
that object and it's creating transient signals. Um And
these transient signals, refresh visual signals um which otherwise
would fade. I like to mention Jurassic Park here.
And did you see Jurassic Park? Yes, I do.
You know that famous scene where um this guy
is standing out of the car and T Rex
comes looking very ravenous and they scream, stand still.
He can only see relative motion and then T
Rex moves his head. Yes, relative motion and scoops
them up in one bite. Anyway, the blind spot
is stabilized on the retina. So it doesn't create
transients and so it fades. So it's not gonna
cause a problem in itself, but you still have
uh an incomplete retina limit with a big hole
in it. And so how do you complete that?
And that is comp accomplished by multiple stages of
completing boundaries across the hall and fill in with
surface brightness and color. And it takes several stages
to do it. Um And I call processes whereby
incomplete representations are completed by multiple stages of processing
a hierarchical resolution of uncertainty because when you're done,
you're going to get completed boundaries and completed surface
representations. So you don't know there was a hole
there. Mhm But then that raises a deep question.
How does the brain know at what stage the
cortical representation say of a surface representing your face
is complete enough uh to um control looking at
you or maybe touching your nose? How do you
know what stage? Because it took a lot of
stages. And you don't want to use a stage
that has an incomplete representation because then the leopard
could leap at you through your blind spot. And
the answer that I propose is that a resonance
with a completed surface representation. And the next processing
stage. Whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa surface
representation. Next stage lights up the surface representation makes
it consciously visible. And then we use the conscious
representation to look and reach. And so the hierarchical
resolution of uncertainty created the need to have some
active process light up the completed representation. And I
call this a surface shroud resonance because spatial attention
focusing on the surface is called a intentional shroud.
And I predict it occurs between a pre stride
visual cortex V four. In other words, there's a
hierarchy of cortical stages. It took several days stages
to complete the surface and the posterior parietal cortex
which is known to support spatial attention. So V
four P PC I predict supports the surface route
resonance and there's a lot of data supporting that.
So getting back to the original question, what's a
visual illusion? If the boundaries that are completed do
not contain expected surface brightness and colors, then we
say we're looking at a visual illusion. The truth
is that almost everything we see is a visual
illusion in the sense that we're completing boundaries and
surfaces not only over the blind spot also over
the plexus of retinal veins that covers the photo
detectors. In addition, where compensating for variable illumination, we
not seeing the illumination gradient. So the final representation
of objects and scenes are visual illusions, but we
only say, oh that's a visual illusion. If the
color isn't what it we think it should be
based on our experience with that kind of boundary.
So everything basically in vision is an illusion and
the ones that look funny, we call illusions.
OK? But about those ones that look funny and
we call illusions. How does understanding how we experience
those connect to our experience of art?
Well, here, I would have shown you several pictures
that would have been uh let people listening. We
weren't able to figure out how to link my
powerpoint to the zoom. I've done it in the
past, but I think the software changed or something.
I don't know. First, I want to say a
little bit more about boundaries and surfaces because they
are the general functional units of how we see.
That's an early prediction of mine that various people
and supported psychophysics. So, um there's a wonderful uh
illusion that it's painful to me not to be
able to show it to you because it's gonna
be so hard to explain is a certain kind
of Kinnier Square, Gaetano Kita famously introduced lots of
visual illusions. He's very great uh Italian perceptual psychologist
who died some years ago in this illusion. He
takes um circles and he'll make part of the
circle black and part of it light blue in
a lot of concentric circles so that the black
blue interface is horizontal. But I'll make a Pacman
out of it where the black part has a
Pacman shape. These are all black lines and then
there's a little quarter of it, which is the
blue parts which have less contrast and he'll do
four of them, 12 parallel to each other, like
oriented three. It is hard to do, but it's
backwards. So we'll have pairs in a row and
then pairs one on top of the other. And
so if you look at where the black and
blue uh interfaces occur, they all line up to
form an illusory square and my book has it.
I don't know if you can see it.
Yes. Yes, I can. Yes.
So you see the point is that because of
the bound, the strong black boundaries inhibiting the weak
blue boundaries, that's enough to make the square form.
And it's also enough to let surface color pour
out of the broken blue boundary to fill in
the entire square. So what you see is a
blue square, neither the blue nor the square are
in the image. But what this illustrates and that's
why it's such a lovely example. Boundaries are completed
inwardly between pairs or greater numbers of inducers in
an oriented way. That's how you complete the square
and the blue color that spills out of the
little blue uh broken boundaries spreads in a uh
un oriented way um to fill in the square.
So um so the color spreads outwardly and un
oriented and the boundaries are completed inwardly and oriented.
And so you could see from this outward, inward
oriented, un oriented, a sense of what I mean,
that boundaries and surfaces are complementary and, and Yang,
because you can't be both oriented and un oriented
and you can't be both outward and inward and
without both of them interacting though you don't see
anything. And so you have these parallel cortical streams
that are doing complementary computing and then interacting to
overcome their complementary deficiencies. And there's one more big
property of boundaries and surfaces. For starters, we can
consciously see surface brightness and color we see while
the, but we can't consciously see boundaries except when
they separate surfaces with different brightness and color boundaries
are invisible. It's called the offset grading. Uh Yes.
OK. So all I've drawn is horizontal black lines,
but usually you can recognize that there's a vertical
boundary of some kind between the ends of those
lines. Can you recognize that? So, but the boundary
is invisible? OK. All boundaries are invisible. The only
reason why you'll see color is because if you
create uh let me see if you can see
this. Whoops. Uh
uh Yes, I can, I can. This
is called the Ehrenstein disk. All I drew were
black lines. It completed a roughly circular boundary, perpendicular
lines. And then at the line ends, there were
little black white contrasts that were little brightness buttons
that filled in within the boundary, the circular boundary
and makes it look brighter. Do you see? It
looks brighter?
Yes, I see.
OK. So that's a case where because the color
can't escape, it makes for a visible brightness difference,
but here the color can escape because it can
flow all out of there and spread uniformly on
both sides of the vertical boundary. And so it's
invisible. So I let me show you, I think
I wanna show you a very famous picture. That's
a lot of fun. Let me see. This is
a famous picture
uh perhaps just please move it a little bit
away from the camera because OK, like that like
that,
I don't know if you can see, I can
see first, it looks just like splotches of black
on white. But if you look at it for
a while, you can see a Dalmatian dog in
snow. It's hard to do the image all the
way to my right is the kita square. Mhm
I don't know if you can see. Yes, I
can see and right next to it horizontally, what's
called a reverse contrast kita square? Now the Kinnier
square just like uh when I made that circle
with the lines, it looks brighter because the Pac
Man, the four pac men create square boundaries and
then they put bright contrast inside which fill in
the square and look brighter. But if you look
at the one right next to it, it has
two black and two white inducers on gray background.
And there you can recognize that there is a
square but the gray inside and outside of the
square is the same. So it's visible. So in
the case of the reverse contrast, Ken it a
square, I'm so sorry, I should have just made.
No, no, no worries. I can edit this.
Yeah. So you can consciously recognize a a square
boundary that you don't see. Um Anyway, many artists
knew uh instinctively about these things, including matisse who
I love and matisse used to like writing that
all bound. Well, he didn't write all boundaries are
invisible, but he painted with color blotches and knowing
that the boundaries would be completed to create a
scene. And one of my favorites is the self
care and
I leave it, leave it like that, please. Yeah.
Yeah. He painted that in uh 1905. And if
you see it uh in my book or on
the web or wherever you'll see that there are
a lot of color splotches, but they're arranged in
a way that invisible boundaries join them and create
surface representations of objects. So let me see if
I can, they get the schematic of that.
Yes, I can see it now. Yeah,
you see the splotches create a modal boundary groupings
which then capture the splotches into surface color. So,
OK, anyway, so um that is one link between
art and um illusions. And I discussed the work
of 14 different artists showing how they all instinctively
exploited different properties of how we see. I mean,
just consider like uh the impressionists like Monet and
Point Allistic painting sera. Um YOU know how these
little points of color arranged uh in an appropriate
way, generated emergent boundaries and surfaces that you can
interpret as a beautiful scene. So uh my book
spends a lot of time showing how different artists
and artistic movements um uh generated uh painterly precepts
that we understand often as scenes and objects even,
you know, and like how you get effects of
three dimensional curvature in a two D painting. And
one of the big things my book explains is
how the way our visual system adapted to the
three dimensional world, those same laws automatically enable us
to understand paintings. Um ZOOM screen movies as 3d
objects. You know, I'm not seeing you like a
pancake, I'm seeing a frontal view of a three
dimensional face.
And so we've been talking here a lot about
the visual system, but how do we go from
seeing to recognizing and also then to predicting the
world?
Um So first let's distinguish, seeing and recognizing. So
seeing, we open our eyes and if there's enough
light we'll see, it could be unfamiliar or familiar.
Uh So seeing is a general purpose process, but
we only recognize familiar things. So recognition requires prior
learning of recognition categories for objects and scenes. Uh
SO that these categories would selectively fire after learning
in response to the objects and scenes that we've
experienced before. And that raises the question, how do
you learn a recognition category? And I already noted
that Adaptive Resonance Theory or art explains how we
learn to recognize stuff without experiencing catastrophic forgetting. And
one thing I didn't say about learning in what
I said, it enables us to pay attention. But
what it's what we're learning as we're learning categories
that can be used for prediction is what are
the critical feature combinations that are going to predict
uh successful action? How do we suppress the irrelevant
outliers? And when you study adaptive residency, you see
how over learning trials outlier, irrelevant features get actively
suppressed and you gradually converge it can be very
fast. It depends on the complexity of the problem
on a set of critical features in the activation
pattern. Uh THAT you know, the top down expectation
is lighting up and it's so critical features that
go into the bottom up adaptive filters that choose
the category and in the top down expectation that
the category reads out to focus attention. And so
the critical features enable art categories to be associated
with predictive consequences. Um Yeah. So and so and
different resonances then support seeing and recognizing I mentioned
mhm A surface shroud resonance supports conscious seeing and
uh the shroud is in posterior parietal cortex. Um
THE surfaces in V four, when that resonance occurs,
it propagates top down all the way down to
uh lateral chani it all the way up to
prefrontal cortex. And because of what's called the art
matching room, namely how we pay attention. It selects
the critical features that uh we should be looking
at. But then the feature category resonance um which
goes into the watch stream, recognition and perception stream
that supports conscious knowing. So that when a surface
shroud resonance and a feature category resonance synchronize, when
I look at a familiar person's face, I both
see them and know who they are. Um And
I had a nice, nice picture of that. But
if, if you're interested anyway about my book, if
you are interested, I I should say this because,
you know, you might think such a big book.
Uh If you buy it on Kindle, it's 15
bucks. And if you buy it from Amazon, it's
about 30 it would have cost over 100. But
I worked very hard on the book and I
want the people who are interested to be able
to afford it. So I I asked Oxford University
Press how much of my own money I had
to give them to bring the prices down. So
if you get it, it's cheap because I subsidized
it.
Well, thank you so much for that. That's very
generous. I guess that people will
be. How much did it cost in Portugal? Yeah,
I don't know why the, the you, you use
euros in Portugal.
Uh, Y yes, I, I mean, I, I think
it cost around, uh, I don't know, 30 I
guess I um order it from Amazon Spain. So,
yeah, so that's not that different from $30.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, that's right. That's
right. Well, thank you for buying it. So um
should we, should we move on? Uh
Yes. Uh And I was going to ask you
now, uh actually earlier, you've mentioned for example, your
uh cognition, emotion motor model. But how do you
look at the relationship between emotion and cognition
and brave cognition about is what we know about
the world and emotion embodies, how we feel about
what we know. And it's emotion that gives value
to what we know. And here another resonance occurs
between our cognitive alike representations and our emotional representations.
So the alike ones are in places like infra
temporal and prefrontal cortex. The emotional ones are in
places like the Amygdala and hypothalamus. And when there's
a resonance between cognitive and emotional uh representations that
combines what we know with how we feel about
it. And the feedback from the emotional representation is
called incentive motivation. Not only to pay sustained attention
to something that we currently value, but it also
gives the motivation to release actions to realize goals
about things we value. So, you know, if I
see my wife's face a little way from here,
I'll feel all the good things I feel to
her and the motivation to approach her. So a
cognitive emotional resonance sends positive feedback between the cognitive
and emotional representations. So just as a current object
or event can trigger an emotion, an active emotion
can select and focus attention on objects and events
that are compatible with that emotion. And that can
help us achieve, you know, um results that are
compatible with it where emotion could be hunger and
we just wanna go have lunch. So um how
to notice desire attend and eat that ice cream
cone. It's all wrapped up into cognitive emotional resonances
in their output pathways. Um So the cognitive emotional
resonance is a different kind of consciousness because it
links, for example, um to surface shroud resonance. Well,
I think we're gonna talk about that in a
moment.
So, so I I mean, these different kinds of
awareness that we have and we've talked about some
of them, how, how are they then integrated into
what we experience as unified moments of conscious awareness?
Yeah. So for that multiple adaptive resonance is synchronized.
I mentioned two of them that could. But so
example, during a conversation with a friend, we might
be synchronizing surface shroud residents to consciously see them
stream shroud resonances that consciously hear them feature category
resonances to consciously recognize what we're hearing. Cognitive emotional
resonance is to consciously have feelings about what we're
discussing and then what's called item list resonances to
consciously understand the conversation because they're supporting things like
working memory of sequential sounds that form language phrases
and sentences, and all of them come together to
enable us to act appropriately during the conversation. So
it's not just a single resonance, there's a continually
evolving series of resident states as stuff keeps happening.
And so uh we've already talked here about the
relationship between cognition and emotion. Uh I would like
to ask you now specifically about the prefrontal cortex.
So, in all of what we've been talking about
here, does the prefrontal cortex play a special role?
Um Well, I'm gonna want to show you a
figure of that for sure. But, but first, let
me say it carries out or controls many of
the higher cognitive, emotional and decision making processes that
define human intelligence as it's also controlling release of
actions uh and aimed at achieving value gold. And
as I just mentioned, one of the things prefrontal
cortex has it has um working memories that can
uh generate uh what I call um list chunks
or list categories like words, sentences, phrases, thoughts that
can sequentially determine what's appropriate to do in a
given situation. So it's not just one thing and
it enabled us to generate behaviors that are flexible
and adaptive notably in novel situations and to suppress
ones that aren't by using this contextual knowledge. Um
Can you see the seven regions on top in
red and green?
Uh uh Yeah, I, I mean the green, it's
not perceptible here. But yeah, I see the, the
several
regions on top, they're all different regions of prefrontal
cortex. And basically, when you put together all the
models into this larger neural architecture, it explains how
the prefrontal cortex interacts with uh cognitive emotional decision
making processes to make contextually based decisions about what
to do or think next. So it's uh so
you got to understand how working memories work and
a whole series of things we won't discuss much
today.
So earlier, you've mentioned learning and I want to
ask you a little bit more about it because
actually in the book, you also explain why we
need to understand learning to then properly understand consciousness.
And you distinguish between two different types of learning,
perceiving and knowing versus moving and navigating. How do
they differ from one another?
Right. Well, so I briefly mentioned before that perception
and cognition are represented in the w or ventral
uh cortical stream and then a spatial organization in
action including navigation of representing the where or dorsal
cortical stream. And um uh they obey computationally complementary
laws. I'm gonna just say in words what they
are. And then it may be that one of
the sly, one of the um copies I was
trying to make in my powerpoint was of that.
And I can actually show it. I'll run that
to my other study. So perception and cognition, use
exci toy matching and match based learning. What does
that mean? So if I read out a top
down expectation, um a prime the system for getting
ready to respond more vigorously to an expected event,
oh, you're here, I recognize your face faster. So
that's excitatory matching and match based learning means that
you only go into adaptive resonance if what you're
expecting and what you're learning about uh c close
enough together. So you can suppress stuff and learn
a better and better critical feature pattern. So the
learning is ex excited to it's match based and
the matching is side to it. But navigation and
action use inhibitory matching and mismatch based learning. What
is an inhibitory match, let's say within our movement,
I have a representation of where my hand is
now and I wanted to go here. So this
is my present position. This is my target position.
Then I have a volitional go signal from the
basal ganglia that makes my arm move from here
to here. But when I get here, I am
where I wanna be. So that present target minus
present is zero, that's inhibitory matching. And it turns
out you use that mismatch in an appropriate way
to tune the circuit so that when you are,
where you wanna be the difference vector is zero.
So first here, I can't see what I'm showing
you
I
can see it, here's a slide of adaptive resonance
and you can see the light green down here.
Yes, that's the critical feature pattern so that you
have a top down match on the critical feature
pattern. You go through an excitatory resonance to try
to learn that. And the way that works if
we're gonna discuss it is via the art matching
rule. Uh MOVE
it just a little bit to your left, please.
Yes, like that. Yes.
So the what the art matching rule shows, you
see, there's, if I have bottom up excited Tory
input, it can fire a feature selective cells. If
nothing else is happening, if I activate a category
and I try to read out in those spreading
green adapted pathways, uh AAA critical feature pattern or
prototype, I can't fully do it because I'm also
activating this inhibitory of surround which approximately balances the
excitatory on center. That's how I prime. When I
read out that, that expectation, there might be some
subthreshold activation of the cells that got activated and
a deep trough of inhibition around it. But then
if I have a matching bottom up input, it's
two against one, too excited to one bottom up,
one top down one inhibitory, you can start to
fire and that can lead to resonance. And I
don't know if we discuss, we're gonna discuss that.
Uh What do you do if something unexpected happens?
There's a complimentary attentional system and orienting system where
the learning goes on the attentional system. And if
you get a big enough mismatch or novelty or
unexpectedness, it activates the oriented system which automatically discovers
a better matching category or a new category to
learn the new stuff. So, OK, that was a
little a field. So sorry, let's get back to
your question.
Uh So then, I mean, why is it, why
do we need to understand learning then to properly
understand consciousness?
Well, to summarize my work shows that learning without
catastrophic forgetting is solved by adaptive resonances. And that
properties of the adaptive resonances just after years of
modeling happen to support multiple conscious states with different
functions in different parts of the brain. We reviewed
some of them, all of them are supported by
lots of explanations of modeling simulations and explanations of
data. So, um you know, science is never complete
but um uh I'm I'm sort of baffled in
a way, you know, we live in the world
of Google, you can presumably search for anything in
no time at all. And yet I've explained data
from hundreds of experiments. Never mentioning the word quantum
no quantum. Um There were quantum effects at the
photoreceptors at the when you know noise hits the
the ear at the periphery right away, our brains
are designed to suppress quantum noise and to deal
with it to become deterministic. And yet today, there
are still people who are promoting that, you know,
consciousness must be quantum because they don't understand it
and must be in microtubules. So how do you
recite Keats out of a microtubule? That's beyond my
understanding. So there's overwhelming evidence that what I'm saying
is at least on the road to the truth
and the thought experiments cannot be denied because the
hypotheses are familiar facts. Um When I grew up
learning science, I thought you studied the theories that
explain the most data in a principled way and
nothing comes close. So I hope some people are
interested in studying it. And I wrote my book
in particular to be self-contained and non technical. But
that being said, we are talking about the human
mind, which is perhaps the most complex system in
nature that we can hope to understand scientifically. So
uh it requires thoughtful reading. I have friends who've
read it uh parts of it, you know, who
know no science at all. Um A rabbi, a
pastor, a, a visual artist, a gallery owner, a
lawyer, the social worker. Um AND they would read
the parts that interest them and, and that's possible
because I wrote the chapter. So after you read
the preface and introductory chapter, one, each chapter can
be read independently of the others. So you don't
have to try to read the whole thing who
has that much time or interest. But you know,
if you're interested in about feelings, you can jump
to the chapter about feelings and so on.
So let me ask you now a little bit
about the evolution of the brain. And actually earlier,
you've already touched a little bit on the idea
or the proposal that some people have of modularity.
But what do you think about that idea more
specifically about the idea of modularity of the brain
slash
mind? Well, brain anatomy is definitely specialized. There are
multiple brain regions that carry out different functions like
vision, audition, cognition, emotion, and so on. But the
processes aren't carried out by independent modules. In fact,
if you look at f the famous Feldman and
Van Essen macro circuit, which I had a picture
of um they all interact. Um I can't, you
see, I can't see it when, when you can
see it.
Yes, but I can see it.
Yes. OK. So on the one hand in the
lower right, that's the anatomical diagram by Feldman and
Van Een of the interactions in the visual system
dense bottom up, top down multiple stages. Remember, hierarchical
processing of uncertainty and the bigger picture if you
could read it gives the functions carried out by
different parts of visual cortex along with what region
it is. And there are bottom up, top down
horizontal interactions and and as the figure says, the
bottom up horizontal and top down interactions overcome complementary
processing deficiencies. So if it weren't for them, those
interactions nothing could be completed effectively. And moreover, each
of the processes do what one's called multiplexing information.
So a visual boundary, it's not just an edge.
If you know, I the the famous example of
a shaded ellipse, if all it was was a
bounding edge at the instead of a boundary, then
the color inside would just fill in and you'd
see a flat gray ellipse, but boundaries respond to
edges, texture shading and depth. And so, um in
addition to hierarchical resolution of uncertainty with all these
interactions, each of the computations are multiplexing, multiple properties.
And as I said before, otherwise, you couldn't, I
couldn't ever learn to recognize your face. You know,
you have texture, you have shading, you have boundaries.
Um It's all overlaid. I have to be able
to deal with it holistically. Did that help? No.
Yes, that helped. And uh earlier or just a
minute ago, actually, you mentioned how uh many theories
of consciousness out there, people, apparently people who propose
them apparently do not even look at uh scientific
data. So, but why do you think there are
so many theories of consciousness out there? And uh
would you have a solution for how we should
actually approach it that
we all have a conscious experience? So maybe we
feel entitled, but we also experience cognitive impenetrability, which
means that in our daily experience, if you don't
study neuroscience, you don't even know you have a
brain. And for hundreds of years, people thought that
our experience was in our pancreas or our liver
or you know, so um you can't introspect the
answer. Mhm And so I don't believe that a
theory which discusses consciousness is a theory of consciousness.
Unless it can show how interacting brain processes give
rise to conscious psychological experiences, you have to make
the link and without a linking hypothesis between brain
and mind, brain processes have no functional role and
psychological processes have no mechanistic explanation. So you're high
and dry. Now, as I mentioned, I'm lucky, I
started passionately studying psychology as a 17 year old.
And that drove me because I always think in
real time into studying brain dynamics, I I didn't
mention but I was driven into neural networks to
explain data about verbal learning, serial, verbal learning, how
we learn lists of anything. And I didn't know
they were neural networks. I had never studied, I
was a freshman after all cell bodies of neurons,
axons, synapses, synoptic knobs, transmitters, action potentials. They were
all in my model from a psychological derivation. And
so only when I talked to pre-med, friends who
were studying it in their pre-med courses that I
realized the things that they told me they're learning,
I already knew. So you have to make that
link. And from a very early age, I discovered
a way to penetrate cognitive and penetrability and people
who want to know how I've done it and
others have tried to do it. Um They should
read my book and then if they get really
interested. Um If you go to my web page,
which is just sites, si Tes dot Bu for
Boston university.edu/, Steve Gsteveg sites W to use flash
Steve G, you'll see maybe 570 archival articles and
quite a few videos of self-contained lectures and interviews
to learn more about it in detail. But my
book is one is a good, you know, one
place to go shopping for this information. There are
17 chapters on different stuff and it covers a
lot of stuff.
So yeah,
yeah. So what makes me frustrated with some very
well known scientists? I won't mention like the quantum
guys if they could explain even a tiny fraction
of the amount of data I've explained by that.
I mean, how brain dynamics give rise to parametric
psychological experiences in data. I would think they were
making a serious contribution but they don't even try
and, and they never try to compare their contribution
with mine, which I just feel is unscientific. It's
not how I was brought up beyond bad manners.
It's unscientific, which is the severe criticism in my
lexicon.
So let's move ahead here. I I think that
earlier we've already touched on what consciousness is good
for and you've also explained what resonance states and
resonance mean. So I mean, another thing that people
many times bring to the table when talking about
consciousness, particularly the philosophers. And this is something that
was coined, I guess by uh David Chalmers in
the nineties is the hard problem of consciousness. Do
you think that it can be solved scientifically?
Well, let me, um of course, it depends how
you define it. Let me just read first Wikipedia
says, and I'll quote, the hard problem of consciousness
is the problem of explaining how and why we
have quality or phenomenal experiences, um how sensations acquire
characteristics such as colors and taste. So to a
certain extent, and I will come back to this
moment. All my theories do just that. Like my
theory of vision is trying to explain how we
see, you know, boundaries surf, you know, shading texture,
color, all these properties of surfaces, paintings and so
on. But let me just give another quote from
Nagel in 74. He wrote in part when we
see, for example, we experience visual sensations, the felt
quality of redness, the experience of dark and light,
the quality of depth in a visual field. Other
experiences go along with perception and different modalities, the
sound of a clarinet, the smell of mothballs. Well,
um one can give a scientific explanation of what's
going on in your brain when you see red,
dark and light depth, um sounds of instruments, but
no theory in science that's defined by mathematical equations
as all scientific theories to the present have can
experience the color red or any other conscious qualia
equations don't have qualia. But in other sciences um
like I I love this uh quote after you've
read Lamb's huge treatise on hydrodynamics, you still don't
know that water is wet, but you know, just
about everything you'd ever wanna know about water and
other fluids, including air um to design airplanes that
fly boats that float on the surface of marines.
You have an effective understanding of water and the
fact that you don't know it's wet matters less
and less because you can give a scientific explanation
of what is happening. First, what characterizes the state
of a liquid versus a gas versus solid through
the molecular theory of gasses and this and that
and the other thing. So it just doesn't matter
after a while. And so in my life, given
what I know that I know um the fact
that I'm seeing beautiful colors around me, I can
understand a lot of how that is happening and
it is outside what an equation I can give
you representations of the objects and the colors and
their forms and their brightnesses. But I can't say
why it looks red. I can't because an equation
can't do that. And the the, but the answer
is an equation can't do that in any science.
You know, there's this famous um uh example, I
hope I'm remembering it right? You know, when um
astronauts were coming down and landing and they landed
somewhere in, I don't know, Arizona or wherever or
wherever, there was a flat arid surface. And the
first thing I guess maybe these were the first
guys to the moon. I don't remember. But the,
the, the anecdote is the first thing they said
when they got out was the bump, was there?
Meaning that the computation of their trajectory coming in
to the atmosphere predicted there would be a little
bump and it was there. But that's not the
same thing as the qualia uh f experiencing the
bump. Uh So science can be effective and useful,
but I do think it's outside the province of
equations to say why water feels wet, you know,
we can say why a fluid has certain properties
but why it feels wet. I, I don't think
equations can do and if someone can, I, I
will study them passionately. I don't see how it
can be done in principle though. Mhm
So uh let's talk here a little bit about
some of the applications of the way you approach
consciousness in your book. Before, toward the end, we
talk a little bit about uh principles of brain
design and some other general questions. So do you
think that your approach to consciousness would have any
implications for the way we understand mental disorders?
Well, um this is one of the things I
call an acquired taste, just like consciousness was an
acquire taste. It's not something I ever dreamed I'd
have anything to offer. Um But so all of
the neural models start by studying the brain dynamics
and mental functions of normal or typical individuals because
there are vast databases on that, you know, many
hundreds thousands of scientists. Like if you go to
the annual meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, I
think a recent meeting at 26,000 scientists, they're all
doing incredible work, huge databases. But at a certain
point, I noticed that if some of the processes
get imbalanced or damaged in specific ways, then I
could see formal behavioral symptoms of mental disorders emerged.
And, you know, I just had to notice that
it was in the model. Uh And so it's
in this spirit, I've so far explained behavioral symptoms
based on precisely defined imbalances. Remember, complementary computing is
a balancing act or, or actual lesions in Alzheimer's
disease, autism, uh Fragile X syndrome, schizophrenia, medial temporal
amnesia, visual and auditory amnesia and neglect and problems
of slow wave sleep. So that came in through
the back door just like all of it is.
So the moral of the story for young scientist
is uh don't look for shortcuts, uh try to
understand the underlying principles and designs. Uh And then
try to model it in an authentic and serious
way. It's hard work. Uh Sometimes I wasn't ready
to even write down anything about a problem for
10 or 20 years until I'd accumulated enough uh
information to be able to proceed. But then uh
I like saying it's the gift that keeps on
giving consciousness was part of the gift that kept
on giving, understanding a little bit of mental disorder
is part of the gift that kept on giving.
So if you try to get to the heart
of the matter, it's richness will reward you many
times over. But I've been lucky because I started
very young. And even though it's controversial for quite
a few years before neural networks were even a
thing, there were always enough people in Washington who
had faith in me and the work to give
us enough funding to do the work. And it's
not like the kind of funding where you need
50 million to get a fancy machine. All the
money that supported me paid for uh graduate fellows
ships and postdocs uh for people to learn from
me and learn to do science with me. So
it's pennies on the dollar was a good investment
anyway. Um Did that say enough about that? Mhm.
Uh
And another topic that you also cover in your
book is irrational decisions. What is, what is an
irrational decision exactly? And why do we make them?
Well, you know, there are several different kinds and
uh let me just make a comment before I
focus on one kind in general. If a decision
fails to achieve one's goal, when another decision that
would achieve the goals readily available, it wasn't chosen.
We may want to say they were being irrational,
you know, and just like in cognitive emotional interactions,
you might have feelings about stuff and you just
can't bring yourself to do it. Uh And there
are many factors that can cause it, including an
experience with this kind of decision making or the
need to make a quick decision around the stress.
You know, there are speed accuracy, trade-off problems. But
the most famous psychological database concerns what's called decision
making under risk. That is decisions in situations that
are uncertain because the outcomes are defined by probabilities.
You know, if you do this and that the
probability of getting this payoff is that if you
do that and this the probability of getting that
pay off is that and which do people choose?
And um Danny Conman and Amos Tversky won the
Nobel Prize in Economics in 2002 for their experiments
in an algebraic model. They published to fit that
data in 1979 explaining paradoxical properties of irrational decision
making in probabilistic environments and their algebraic model, which
is, you know, phenomenological model that tries to compress
the description of the data. And it is very
useful, it's called prospect theory. But then in 1987
I think my student, Bill Gutowski and I uh
went beyond it in a uh well known article
in psychological review. Uh BECAUSE my article with Bill
introduced a real time neural network model, we gave
it a name because I started realizing you got
to name everything you don't need to prevent other
people from plagiarizing it. I won't stop them. But
at least you could say that's just uh affective
balance theory is what we called it that quantitatively
explains and simulated the Danny Kamman and Amos Tversky
data as emergent properties. And all we did was
we applied my already known cognitive emotional model to
that data. So we didn't do any more modeling.
We showed that their data fell out of the
wash when the model was exposed to the kind
of risky environments like those in prospect theory. So
that I thought had an important lesson that Darwinian
selection does shape our mind to be adaptive, but
it it fails in certain environments. Um You know,
it can't anticipate every kind of risky environment. And
in the same spirit in chapter 17, in my
book, I summarize other examples of irrational behaviors including
superstitious and self punitive behaviors in a similar way
how in certain environments, you know, and you know,
um conspiratorial thinking, sadly how certain social environments can
support conspire uh conspiracy kind of ideas which we
see all too much in the United States these
days to say. So my abstract with Bill I,
I summarize a little here. These explanations illustrate that
the data concerning decision making under risk may now
be related to data concerning the dynamics of condition
and cognition and emotion as consequences of single psychophysiological
theory. So in other words, you didn't have to
build a new theory and it really, and we
explained some risky decision making data that common and
Tversky could not like pref what's called preference reversals.
So our theory is more powerful both in the
sense of um uh explaining their data as the
merchant properties of known brain on the motional dynamics,
but also explaining more data because Bill, you know,
didn't experiment uh on the uh preference reversals. But
you know, our paper was published in 87 uh
Danny and Amos was in 79 They got the
Nobel Prize in 2002. We didn't share it. So
go figure.
Well, uh so we've already also touched on the
or addressed the problem of cognitive impenetrability. So let's
talk about something that we, you've alluded to in
the beginning of our conversation, that is A I
system. So do you think that having a better
understanding of our brains give rise to minds would
also be important for designing A I systems?
Well, you know, today, when people say the word
A I, they usually mean neural networks, which wasn't
the case when A I was symbolic, Marvin Minsky
realized he ought to get on the gravy train.
In fact, there's a funny anecdote about that. Uh
Marvin Minsky and Seymour Pappert when they were doing
symbolic A I, they were at MIT and I
was an assistant professor and they really attacked me
brutally because I was doing neural networks. And Marvin
when he was a young man tried to do
neural networks and he failed. And since Marvin was
the smartest man in the world. How can this
little dipshit kid be allowed to do neural networks?
They attacked me. Anyway, years later, after I'd found
it and became first president of the International Neural
Network Society and the Archival journal neural Networks. And
I was veteran chief for many years, I had
a lot of influence over the organization of international
conferences on neural networks. And I said, let's invite
Marvin Minsky because he had just written his book
Society of Mind, which basically was just plagiarism. But
hey, that was nothing new for the People in
Tech Square. And I figured, let's hear what Marvin
has to say. Sadly, Marvin ever prepared. Um But
he got up and the first thing he said
was there are two things I regret in my
life. One was I underestimated gross Burt. And then
he, the rest of his presentation was telling jokes,
he wasn't prepared poor Marvin. He was such an
egotist amazing. And you know, he did some useful
earlier work and then he just, you know, shoveled
in the guilt anyway. Uh What can I say?
So my neural networks illustrate autonomous adaptive intelligence and
not all neural networks do. So I was trying
to say now when people say neural networks or
a I, they usually mean deep learning. And uh
I published a paper a few years ago because
I was invited to where I explain why deep
learning is untrustworthy because it's not explainable. Mm If
you make a prediction, using deep learning and let's
say it's a medical prediction and someone dies as
a result. And the surviving family are grief stricken
and they say, why did you tell the doctor
to do that? And your answer would be, I
don't know, you're gonna be sued out for everything
you're worth. So it's untrustworthy because is unexplainable and
it's unreliable because it can experience catastrophic forgetting. In
fact, in 1988 I wrote a off sighed paper
that I review in my magnum opus with 17
prop problems that back propagation which deep learning uses
as its learning engine still has that art never
had and yet they still choose not to use
it. So deep learning is deeply flawed and then
chat GP t you know, a generative A I,
I mean, you know, they've thrown into it immense
databases, they scrub the internet. And so perhaps not
surprisingly, it can generate a lot of phrases and
sentences that sound intelligent. But basically, you know, it
starts with a sentential context and has a probabilistic
algorithm for trying to guess what to say next.
The foundational problems are, it has no goals, it
has no meaning and it literally does not know
what it's talking about literally. And in fact, um
on the connections website now, I don't know if
you follow it. There's been this very heated discussion
of this uh attack uh on A I of
this kind led by Gary Marcus who's a professor
at NYU and everything they're saying against it is
correct. But I believe the future of humanity will
benefit from an A I that is increasingly autonomous,
adaptive and intelligent in its algorithms, machines and mobile
robots, especially ones that embody brain inspired designs because
these are the ones that can seamlessly interact in
brain machine uh um co-operative ventures. And I'm the
guy who's led that and we're well on the
way to it in terms of meaning, you know,
I don't want to presume that everything's understood. In
fact, just last year I published an article on
my web page about how Children learn in real
time from their parents and other teachers to learn
effective and perceptual language meanings. It's not in my
book. I wasn't ready to write that paper till
last year and that's just the beginning of what
has to be a huge a research program that
I clearly will not live to see completed. But
at least now there's that foundation you can't say
as people in a, I used to do all
the time with the best game in town. They've
never been the best game in town, but they
spend so much time marketing with people like me,
spend so much time thinking and writing and discovering
I, I can't do that. That's not why I
wanna stay alive. Um Yeah. So should I say,
uh maybe I'll say, you know, the best example
of autonomous adaptive intelligence is the human mind. We're
autonomous because we can act on our own. We're
adaptive because we can learn throughout life because we
solve the stability plasticity dilemma. And we're intelligent. Hm,
at least in the sense that we can as
a species make wise enough decisions and plans to
create civilizations, even though we can be superstitious, conspiratorial,
terribly cruel and violent as well. And the end
of my book discusses, you know, why they and
you know, there's a kind of Yin Yang in
the human mind and good and evil are built
right into us. But I also try to clarify
why good has a a leg up. Um BECAUSE
bad things usually pub punished and either suppressed or
avoided where you can, good things can be sustained
and you can build beautiful things, important, useful things
on them. So there's a broken symmetry and evolution
between good and evil and our lives depend on
it.
Uh So talking about good and evil and you
also mentioned a little bit earlier. Superstition. Uh DOES
the approach that you present in the book will
also have implications for how we understand things like
morality, religion, creativity and the human condition where I
guess many of these topics are traditionally uh approached
in philosophy.
Yeah. Well, um remember that Newton thought he was
doing natural philosophy when you do deep science, it
gets philosophical, deep philosophical. Um Well, I wanna do
a quote chapter 17 in my book, likely discusses
some of these, the things they could be discussed
much more, more extensively on page 621 of the
header of this section in question is more or
less what I was just talking about symmetry breaking
of positive and negative in cognition and emotion, coal
and a reason for hope. I think hope is
an important word and especially in our crazy world.
Let me just quote it. It's not too long
as with all predictive behaviors. There are cognitive and
emotional reasons for morality that are built into the
most basic properties of our brains in both cognition
and emotion. There is, I'll argue a broken symmetry
between positive and negative processes with the positive emphasized
because it is just a broken symmetry. Much as
every source of light can cast a shadow, both
good and evil deeds are possible. Although I would
claim there's a built in bias toward the good
so that values aren't purely relative. And as I
was just indicating, uh an example of the broken
symmetry is that bad deeds are punished and punishment
suppresses behavior uh which causes us to avoid them.
Uh And if you don't avoid them, you end
up in jail or worse, whereas good deeds are
rewarded and thus can be sustained and built upon.
Um And I believe in that very much, you
know, it's a broken symmetry that's not very romantic,
but I think understanding it, you know, you don't
have to understand much more than on the level
I said is very clarifying a lot of our
development and evolution due to broken symmetries. Um YOU
know, and just look at us, we're bilaterally symmetric
but with broken, you know, we have a dominant
hemisphere in our cortex, uh we can be right
handed or left handed. So we are broken but
we are symmetric and is built into everything. And
I believe that a lot of uh the origin
of the universe, although I shouldn't talk about things
I know nothing about. I, well, not, not that
I know nothing but I think a lot of
broken symmetries drove evolution. So,
so uh let's uh we've already also talked earlier
about the brain design principles that you uh uh
go through in the book Complementarity and Certainty and
Resonance. So perhaps let, let's go back to the
very beginning of our conversation when I asked you
about when psychology slash neuroscience and physics diverged in
terms of their approach to the brain and the
mind. Do you think that the paradigm you present
in your book can help unify them again?
Well, let me quote again from my book and
then if uh maybe I'll make some other comments
on pages 635 and 636. Again, chapter 17, as
I explained in chapter five, brains can also bind
into coherent moments of conscious experience within a unified
self measurements taken from multiple physical sources light sound
pressure, temperature, bodily biochemical processes and the like. Um
SO like when someone asks, how do you feel
today? You can tell them all sorts of stuff.
And it's not just like, you know, I have
a light meter, a sound meter, a pressure meter,
it's all unified into a coherent moment of conscious
awareness. So the brain is also a universal. Remember
I talk a little about that self organizing measurement
system of the world and in the world. Um
CHAPTER one explained that due to this universal measurement
process, brains may play a role that'll be compared
with the role played by played in physics by
Max Planck's law of black body radiation. Cause by
describing a radiation spectrum that's universal across all matter
planks, lushes and quantum mechanics. Whereby to explain all
subatomic phenomena, the brain's universal measurement process can be
expected to have a comparable impact on future science.
So, you know, we don't, our brains don't function
when it comes to cognition, emotion, et cetera on
a quantum level. Um YOU know, even if there
are uh noisy fluctuations in individual cells, often cell
populations have mean activities uh that are much larger
than the variants. So we can have a a
kind of um uh deterministic or mean field dynamic
equations or operating dynamics that's not operating uh with
quantum fluctuations uh needed to be considered. But we
have this universality in terms of all these physical
fields as a measurement device that's self organizing. And
I um also in chapter 17, talk about how
some of these principles um like complementarity uncertainty and
resonance operate even in single non neural cells, a
a very primitive uh cell types that have existed
long before humans. So there is a universal developmental
code in which art adaptive resonance is part of
that larger code. It is one example of the
kind of resonance that you find uh even in
morphogenesis of very simple species. Um So, you know,
I talk about the kind of resonance that occurs
when a blastula becomes a gastro, I talk about.
Um uh WELL, you know, read the book, I'm
getting a little worn out of my search and
my brain isn't. So there is a universal developmental
code that um that includes the things that we
experience when our brains start actually enabling us to
remember what we know about the world. And resonance
goes way way back in morphosis. And you know,
I've always thought, but you know, maybe if someone
makes this precise or shows its wrong, I've always
thought of um the double helix as an example
of complementary computing. And you know, Barbara mcclintock got
the Nobel Prize for showing it's very dynamic. Um
So, you know, if that is properly thought of
as an example of complementary computing, uh There are
many examples of this kind of complementarity uh throughout
all of life, um et cetera, et cetera, et
cetera. Uh And as I say, you know, when,
um so for example, some of the competitive dynamics
I discuss like mass action recurrent on center off
around networks competition uh is universal, not only when
you think of it on the species level, a
a Darwin, but it also occurs at every level
of cellular organization. Uh So the aggregation of slime
molds is an example of a competitive dynamic with
an on center of surround recurrent network. Uh So
there were these universal computational principles that are not
only about us that are also about all living
things. And you know, when I read theoretical physics,
which I've been doing since I was a boy,
you know, I see what I view as physical
versions of on center of surround networks galaxy as
it were, you know, it's a balance balancing act,
but I can't say anything useful about that.
So, uh let me just ask you one last
question then and I want to ask you this
because I also, I actually found it very interesting
that you talk about this in the book and
whenever people in science talk about laws many times,
uh I mean, people get upset about talking about
laws that are not laws of physics, I mean
laws of biology, psychology or whatever. I mean, people
are not usually very fond of that. But do
you think that we can actually talk about laws
of cell biology?
Well, cell biology is vast and these days he
biology usually means genetics. And uh I'm not a
geneticist, although I did just make a very speculative
comment about the double helix. Um So I'm not
sure what context to put the question, you know,
it is part of cell biology. What I said
about um uh slime mold aggregation, their cells, their
biology, the growth of hydrous heads, their cells. It's
biology in that sense, there are examples of shared
laws, um you know, gastro relation, it's cell biology,
it's not in a brain, there is no brain
yet. So um I feel, you know, even my
work has shown that what I'm doing is a
special case of more general laws that you can
see reflected in examples of cells in biology. But
um if you, if what you mean is genetics,
then I'm not a geneticist, but it does strike
me that the double helix. Uh AND for all
I know it's being done, maybe the stuff that
Barbara mcclintock got started is maybe being studied very
actively and I just don't read about it in
terms of the dynamics of those complimentary strands. Um
YOU know, complementary computing generally gives you a form
of stability. You know, the Yin and the Yang
alone aren't enough but together and bound by the
right kind of feedback. They can give you stable
organization just like with the boundaries and surfaces, for
example, like with the water and West streams, one
of the great triumphs of the watch stream, which
I try to explain through models is how you
develop invariant recognition categories, size and variant view and
variant position variant. So I could recognize you from
any view, distance angle, you know. But the problem
with being position and variant is at the place
where you're computing this and the anterior of infra
temporal cortex, I have no idea where your face
is in space. And that's what the, so that's
in the W stream, the West stream gives a
spatial representation. So you have to be able to
go from an invariant representation into the watch stream
into a variant position representation in the West stream.
And I explain how that happens. Um uh But
by themselves, you know, you'd have positions without objects
and objects, you didn't know where they are. So
each of them is useful and important, but it's
not enough his survival. So complementary computing on every
level of our brains is necessary for survival. And
it may very well be uh at every level
of cell biology. But I'm not a person who
studied non brainin cell systems for long enough to
make a strong comment. I'd love to know more
about it. Maybe I'll do more of that. Uh
In my remaining years. I don't know.
Well, uh there are many other topics that of
course, we could cover here because the book is
massive and very detailed. And again, it is the
conscious mind resonant brain how, which brain makes a
mind and I'm leaving a link in the description
to it and I hope that my audience runs
and buys it. It's a very interesting book. And
uh Steve, apart from the book, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet?
Oh, yes. So I had mentioned once, but let
me say again, I have a personal web page
sites, si tes dot bu.edu. So sites Boston University
Education slash Steve Gsteveg. Um uh All my articles
can be downloaded from there and quite a few
interviews and uh some videos of keynote lectures on
different topics. Um And if anyone wants to write
me with a question about my work, my email
is simple. It's just Steve Steve at bu.edu. Steve
at bu.edu. So I love to discuss science. And
um um what can I say? I started 67
years ago and I'm still at it. And um
and that's a testimony and I only need to
my good luck but to really respect the foundations
of what I was studying and not go for
shortcuts and they've thrust me forward. So I never
hit a brick wall. And uh I've loved every
minute of it even though it's been really hard
work.
Well. And uh thank you so much for that
work and it's been an immense pleasure to have
you on the show. Thank you so much for
accepting the
invitation. Thank you for inviting me and I'll look
forward to getting the URL for it so I
can uh hope I don't cringe too much.
No, it was great. It was great. So, thank
you again.
My pleasure.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no Wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field. Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger, Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K
Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel Sran, David Sloan
Wilson Yasa, Dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter Romani
Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale
Me, Gary G Alman, Samos, Ari and YPJ Barboza
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franka
Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary. Ftw Daniel Friedman,
William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano Chris
Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao Marie Martinez. Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey Junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George
Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stuffin, Tom Veg and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman,
Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si, Adrian Bogdan Knits and
Rosie. Thank you for all.